In superconducting magnets, the irreversible transition of the conductor to resistive state is called a “quench.” Deposing large stored energy, quenches can lead to damage of magnet components due to localized heating, high voltage, or large mechanical forces. Unfortunately, current quench protection systems can only detect the quench after it happens, giving magnet operators very short response time (a few ms). Furthermore, magnet quench’s behavior is still not well-understood, which is why there has been significant uncertainty as to whether “quench precursors" exist, and in what kind of data they would appear.
In this study, we propose a quench detection system using an auto-encoder fully-connected deep neural network. After being incrementally trained with statistical features extracted from acoustic data in sensors around the magnet, the system often detects anomalous events seconds before quench start time. While the exact nature of the events are still not fully understood, we show that the system can utilize the events to "forecast" quenches before they appear under magnet training conditions. In a randomized experiment, we were able to "predict" 77% of the quench within 15 seconds before they happen. This hints at the existence of quench precursors in acoustic data, which then can be utilized in an anomaly detection system such as ours to give warnings of magnet quenches. While the correlations between those anomalous events and the quench event are still under investigation, the system is being prepared to be used in off-line and eventually on-line operations.